<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We shall not cite the facts in question here, having no intention of making a <em>resume</em> of them and more particularly desiring to explain how we understand the family of the future. Those readers who wish to study the question more deeply may refer to the works of Letourneau: Sociology” and “Evolution of the Family;” and to that of Elie Reclus: “Primitive Folk,” in which they will also find references to the sources from which these authors have drawn. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Logically, the explanation of the manner of raising children in future society as we understand it, should be inserted here; but this question being treated in “Society on the Morrow of the Revolution,” we refer the reader to the article: “Children in the New Society.” <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I do not know whether Jean Grave had seen <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Lombroso’s article on the “Physiognomy of the Chicago Anarchists,” one of a aeries on “Criminal Anthropology,” published in the <em>Monist</em>, Chicago, April, 1891, wherein he admits in a footnote that his analysis was based upon portraits in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Capt.</abbr> Schaack’s book, which, as he had learned later, were incorrect!⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. de Molinari, “Political Evolution in the Nineteenth Century.” This work must have appeared in book form since its publication in the <em>Journal des Economistes</em>. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same, page 70. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same, page 63. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same, page 68. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The same, page 68. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These exploits have a worthy counterpart in the present brutal war of the Americana againat the Filipinos.⁠—Proofreader. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Since the above was written the famous Zola trial has given a farther demonstration of the government’s intention to make Dreyfus the scapegoat of its Judases in high places.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the United States army this pleasing little ceremony does not take place at roll-call, but at “inspection,” and if anyone be sent to the guardhouse for “clothes offenses” he is fined by the captain or given so many days incarceration.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The hospital inspection has been abolished in the United States army. —Translator. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This officer corresponds most nearly to the sergeant of the guard in the United States army, I believe, whose term, however, lasts only twenty-four hours.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>have here substituted United States army terms for the French translations as being more adapted to American soldiers.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wax plays a great role in the army. This reminds us of an officer of a company of marines who announced to his men that there being a surplus in the commissary the rations were to be increased from the next day on, and it was his duty to see that they should touch them up with⁠—<em>wax and enamel!</em> <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sort of paralysis here alluded to is especially prevalent in France, and is technically called <em>Landry’s Paralysis</em>. The patient loses control of the urinary organs.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is to be regretted that the author did not give his authority for this large estimate. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Cope the American paleontologist once said in my bearing that the approximate time of man’s presence on earth, so far as known, was thirty-two thousand years.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The adage smacks somewhat of the nation of cooks; in oar ruder Anglo-Saxon, “You scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours.”⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The author’s manner of rejecting the Jesuit doctrine reminds me of the reply of Justus Schwab to the query, “Does the end justify the means?” He answered: “That depends on the end.”⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Chas.</abbr> Letourneau’a “Origin of Property.” <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Readers of Victor Hugo will recollect Cambronne’s answer at Waterloo; those who do not know “<em>Les Miserables</em>” may be informed that Anthony Comstock would not allow me to print it.⁠—Translator. <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
